we've had a whole bunch of videos lately
with Socrates here sitting in the
background but this video is actually
about the philosophy of Socrates now I
know some of you might prefer some of
you might prefer the videos where I'm
just talking about facts in a very dry
and detached manner but I think it would
be a disservice to this video and would
make everything I'm explaining seem a
lot more abstract a lot more difficult
to relate to if I didn't give a little
bit of autobiographical context or what
this means in my own life how I've ended
up approaching philosophy from ancient
Athens again and again and why it
matters to me what philosophy means and
why it matters is really easiest to
explain an approach through contrasting
opposites what a philosophy is trying to
refute what it's trying to debunk can be
understood right away
what problem it's trying to solve or
what positive role is trying to play in
your life may be a lot more difficult to
get a handle on now in my own life I
made a decision maybe was a disastrous
decision when I was the wrong man not to
learn Latin and not to learn Greek and
that was in large part because of my
family my upbringing and how I perceived
myself in the social order within Canada
I thought of Latin and Greek as things
that rich people learned and rich people
studied and that I didn't have access to
and I was wrong I mean it seemed makes
sense when you think about where I came
from and who my parents were my father
grew up in a steel manufacturing town he
became a communist extremist his mother
was a single mom who worked in the steel
factory and his whole story arc was
escaping from the fate of being a steel
worker like most of his other male
relatives whom he knew and and so on and
so forth he had lumpin and proletariat
attitudes his whole life he never
stopped regarding cloth napkins with a
certain kind of religious awe you could
sit him down and
a restaurant he'd pay for a five-star
restaurant or five course meal or
whatever and he'd never touch the cloth
napkin he would be afraid to get a cloth
napkin dirty in his own home in a
restaurant if he'd never left him this
you know working-class everyone don't
don't touch the cloth napkin so who so
this was transmitted to me with a kind
of rational fear of learning Greek and
Latin but it's a fear that was
completely false and the other feeling I
had really reflected the way libraries
used to work which was that I would I
would walk through the shelves of the
library and look at physical books on
the shelf and I had the feeling I had
the impression that all of the research
about ancient Greek philosophy
especially about a mainstream famous
name like Socrates that everything had
already been done that everything there
was to know and everything was to
research was already known just in the
last couple of days I was using Google
Scholar and looking through what's
available and you know peer reviewed
academic research going back 300 years I
mean it's it's not just recent
publications you get now when you search
digital archives and on several
different questions I was searching for
in English admittedly I wasn't looking
at what's published in Russian or French
but in the English language it's
mind-blowing to me that so much of the
work has never been done or has only
been done in a slapdash inadequate
crappy way by some really intellectually
feeble eccentric who clearly did a very
bad job really fundamental questions
about mainstream ancient Greek
philosophy famous names famous names
like Socrates Aristotle and Plato
I didn't perceive that field of studies
as being at a nascent or incomplete
stage or being a field of studies I
could make some kind of really positive
contribution to starting off in Toronto
Canada that no Mises those things and I
was wrong now by contrast Buddhism
presented to me the philosophy of
poverty philosophy that embraced poverty
that was about poverty it was uplifting
but in contrast to this perception had
that the philosophy of Athens and Rome
was attached to privileged wealth and
you know obviously people from a certain
kind of background within England the
United Kingdom but even within places
like Italy and Greece that exist today
those people had a kind of special
access to this tradition and some kind
of imaginary British aristocrat it never
occurred to me that I could just with
hard work and talent you know master
Latin or master ancient Greek and knock
it out of the park and do original
research and and write things that
matter and make youtube videos that
matter view change look that never
occurred to me in that framework but
then when you shift the Britta's 'm and
I was looking at Buddhism in the
war-torn ashes of Cambodia Laos you know
this is especially the form boards maybe
even then sri lanka sri lanka with a
civil war still ongoing you know and
this is a philosophy of poverty and
anyone can get in and make a positive
contribution and you walk past that
shelf and it seems like nothing has been
done before there are these huge caps in
this culture there's so much to do and
on most of these things only one
translator had ever done only once gone
that's okay so this can be my ancient
Greek this can be my Latin this can be
where I where I make my difference and
for a few years it was surgery for
another video and as I said we have made
many other videos about I had a friend
who got a PhD in ancient Hebrew studies
and he said several things that really
shocked me it's right on this topic but
one of the phrases used again again was
when we were discussing particular
issues in the scholarship of ancient
Hebrew he simply said to me ancient
Hebrew is not well understood it came up
a different context he was like no no
there are many passages there are many
artifacts many things that you that are
not well stood where we don't know what
the text means where people are winging
it or making things up we don't really
know what that word means we don't know
why that verb is in that form in that
context whatever it is like
like he was really indicating to me in
these discussions we had the scholarship
has not been done this is not well
understood they really need people to go
back and look at many scripts few of
them and again so you can imagine with
this kind of background that time I was
I was very actively working on on
ancient Buddhist manuscripts and stone
inscriptions and stuff that I was
shocked that the core of the
judeo-christian world that right in the
middle of this area of what seemed to me
the most oversaturated most highly
funded field of ancient philosophy
historical research telling me that
stuff is on a achievement I can borrow
his phrase here and say it is it is
really true in 2019 the philosophy of
Socrates is not well understood I think
the main impression that guides
educators all levels whether it's in the
university in high school NATO is
actually just that Socrates is a man in
a rope even a man who walks barefoot in
the snow
that's another anecdote about Socrates
he's a barefoot man robe and people
think of him as a Buddhist monk for that
reason I mean maybe some people in
Catholic culture still think of him as
something like a Catholic monk and maybe
some people think of him like this sort
of mythified fictional version of
Mahatma Gandhi the reality of who Gandhi
was so quite another quite another story
too and people do not think of Socrates
as a sort of angry crotchety old man who
tells people to be ready to go to war
all the time to keep up their military
training to have many sons to have sons
with beautiful women as the mothers by
the way so that there'll be good
citizens for the future someone whose
idea of of civic virtue civic duty isn't
just jury duty and isn't just you know
playing his role in government when he
when he wins the election by a lot which
he did but is actually being ready for
military service
all the time someone who really lived
through a period of constant war in some
ways you know this is not the whole of
the philosophy of Socrates but
understand who he was in his own culture
and also what what he means for us now
already the military side of what he's
teaching the overtly macho life of
perpetual readiness this is not a
Buddhist monastic ideal of readiness
this is not a life of introspection and
prayer his his philosophy a great deal
of his philosophy this is part of why
he's seen as the founding philosopher of
the ancient cynics has to do with
toughness in the most crude physical
sense now just the rest early what is
toughness they were somewhat burdened by
the pseudoscience of their times there
so the early cynics and Socrates himself
in Anniston A's you know they did have
the idea that for instance not eating
when you felt hungry made you tough well
you know maybe in some abstract
psychological sense you feel strong they
thought that being cold and enduring the
cold and this kind of thing makes you
tough there's an idea in Plato also that
you know you become taller by being lean
when you grow up that going through
puberty clean result you being tall
whereas being fat will keep you short so
yeah they were burdened by some
scientific misconceptions I'm not saying
that his guide for how to be a tough guy
would work today but you know there's
this huge effort made to clear the name
of Socrates in the context of nine
public guilt over the fact that he was
murdered I used the term murderer
loosely here he was brought to trial
judged and condemned to death and then
executed and Athens seemingly five
minutes later thought that this was a
terrible crime against philosophy and
was the wrong thing to do
a name you guys may not know is antis
Phineas
in large part the tough-guy philosophy
of Socrates continues on in an undiluted
form in the philosophy of medicine ease
the help the question nobody really
wants to deal with this is about sincere
having now been reading about this stuff
for more than 20 years of my life I've
never seen anyone who really is willing
to deal with the extent to which the
philosophy of Socrates is honestly and
accurately presented by Plato now a
mission so the tough guy side of it as I
say continues natus thinnies simply by
temperament Plato does not seem to be
all that interested in that however how
would we characterize the philosophy of
Plato broadly speaking and thematically
speak so antis thinnies is interested in
toughening you up a kind of life of
Perpetual military readiness sleep with
beautiful women and have beautiful
children with them to make the city more
virtuous and so for the future it's not
all there is to it but there's a lot of
emphasis there on strength and that the
only real joy in life the real happiness
comes from virtue and it's a very quote
unquote manly tough-guy notion of virtue
and this more or less films a whole
major movement in greco-roman philosophy
that continues for centuries and
centuries thereafter okay so and again
this is nothing like Buddhism this is
more like you know some crap again this
is some crazy old man who tells you to
you know in American politics tells you
to always carry your gun with you and
always be ready for the Russians to in
fate or something and again the times
Socrates lived through they had to be
ready all the time for all of their
surrounding nations to invade not just
the Spartans they were invading and
being invaded by all these three people
and launching off on new on new
expeditions there were there were real
social reasons a component story okay so
Plato Plato is absolutely obsessed with
the idea that philosophers ought to take
over government so people praised this
they talk about the core unquote
philosopher-king this is this is like
you know what
the relationship of Satanism to
Christianity is less of a contrast than
the relationship between platonic
philosophy and what ISM Buddhism is
about these men in robes who were
announced the world as they know we're
gonna have nothing to do with politics
we don't know
Plato everything about his philosophy
it's all about taking over the state
through often through dishonest means
through various imaginations that
philosophers can and should for example
pervert one of the most crucial notions
of democracy they have that it's it's
acceptable for philosophers to take over
government and manipulate lotteries of
deciding things through random lot that
just to placate the people to make them
think they have democracy and equality
you have the appearance of a lottery and
then actually secretly corrupted so this
is and this is in Plato this is one of
most fundamental virtues of democracy as
it in the Athens people why because they
know better because Plato thinks he's
one of the wives people who ought to be
deciding this Plato believes in quite a
totalitarian system of government where
he's going to decide everything
including whom you reproduce with who
should have children with who for the
eugenic improvement of humanity
Plato wants the total militarization of
society and want society being ruled by
these quote-unquote Guardians who are a
superior special class of hyper-vigilant
hyper military muscle men want to say
who also have studied philosophy as he
defines it and there's a lot of common
ground between Plato and the idealized
representation of Sparta and this is at
a time when Sparta is the enemy of
Athens not their friend not their ally
he's looking across and he's seeing this
hyper military organized the top-down
authoritarian society and saying hey me
too no in academia what you always get
is this attitude you see this even with
because you see this with the
representation of Socrates and Plato and
you see this even with the
representation of Socrates and Xenophon
this is even in the introduction to our
additions in other ways like oh no no no
um
Plato just takes the name of Socrates
and then presents his own philosophy
through the most
and there's no connection there's no
sense in which the fact that in Plato
it's it's telling you Socrates says X
there's no sense in which that
represents the historical surgeons of
Plato just took the liberty of using
Socrates a man he knew face to face in
to some extent worshipped as his teacher
just use them as a hand puppet to
represent a philosophy that is in many
ways totally contradictory to to what
Socrates actually preached isn't it much
more disturbing and much more difficult
for us to imagine the extent to which
these various pupils the direct students
of Socrates like Plato Vinay destinies
really are in broad thumb attic terms
accurately representing the teaching of
of Socrates well who else were among the
influential students of Socrates have
mention this before the single most
important in terms of both understanding
who Socrates really was and
understanding why he's been
misrepresented in history the way he has
is alkie be at ease now the standard
english pronunciation is Alcibiades I'm
gonna choose to be a slightly more Greek
in my pronunciation I know this is not
remotely the way modern Greeks method
and I've been referred to as alchemy at
ease now alky be at ease was young and
handsome and he was the star pupil of
Socrates alkie be at ease was absolutely
mono maniacally fixated on taking over
leadership of government just like Plato
these are two of Socrates as pupils who
have this incumbent who feel that
they're better educated they want better
education for everyone's true as a
positive part of of Socrates flaws but
you see that throughout his pupils and
there wasn't running okay but they're
the people who've received this superior
education they have this higher level of
philosophical education and now lqb
Oddie's wants to take over the
leadership of athens and it's in the
midst of this long ongoing war and alkie
be at ease also this is ultimately why
he's put on trial and changes his whole
political you know direction he also
seems to have scornful contempt for the
petit superstitions of the
he doesn't believe in the same religion
he doesn't have the same kind of
religiosity that Athenians expected one
other so I talked about that more in an
earlier video where I talked about the
extent to which Socrates really was
guilty of what he was accused of and I
think we have a very very good source
for that which again most academics
don't want to take seriously in the
comedy written about surgeries with a
satire written about Socrates it's a
satire titled the clouds by Aristophanes
and again it's a satire if someone makes
a satire about George Bush or Donald
Trump it's not funny if it has no
connection to reality and even the title
the clouds is pointing out socrates was
a guy who was going out and in an iconic
light and iconoclastic way he was
challenging the superstitious and
religious these are people he was
teaching a religious philosophy that no
there wasn't a magical man in the sky
called Zeus who controlled the clouds
and the rain and lightning there were
these principles of natural physics we
today say philosophy of nature or
something but for them it was physics
that they taught and he says well he
believes in this one God that stands
behind the phenomena of nature but it's
a completely abstract God it's not a God
with a face like Zeus or with a name
the comedian goes too far say it is
ultimately just a vortex like chaos
so one digression leads to another here
the ancient Greek concept of chaos is
more like our concept of things emerging
from chaos it's a kind of creative chaos
so again the use of the word vortex is
not that bad here it's not it's not
chaos in a more absolute or abstract
sense that they're thinking of but that
ultimately the clouds move in the sky
the churning of the clouds of the sky is
a chaos is a chaotic vortex that
ultimately all the principles of nature
and the creation of the world and the
churning of the tides in the ocean
reflect this principle of nature this is
not a God in the same sense that Zuza
you can interpret this as atheism you
can interpret it as monotheism guess who
else preaches this completely
consistently with Aristotle sorry
perfect completely consistent with
Socrates antis thinnies and it's the
the guy mentioned earlier who was on
this macho tough and yourself up
continues that side of of the philosophy
of Socrates and then we have this
comedian ridiculing Socrates but again
are we just willing to accept this
satire this critique this criticism in
some ways is accurately conveying to you
a problem with Socrates laws a problem
from the common public perception of it
this is I'm very very challenging um so
in this context of someone who has
already been publicly criticized and
scorned for being an affront to common
morality to the religion of the the
common man in Athens Socrates has this
star pupil
who's young and handsome and in Athens
they care a lot about being handsome at
this time in this culture that really
matters to politics and he's received
the philosophical learning of Socrates
and there are all these rumors about him
that he's participating in these dark
rituals that show his scorn and contempt
for the common man's mysteries the
common religion and how does he propel
his political career forward he goes to
the Olympics and at the Olympics he
arrives the team of seven charioteers
seven different chariots he enters into
the Olympics and he wins he doesn't just
take first place I think he takes first
place second place and fourth place in
this prestigious race at the Olympus and
nobody had ever shown up with so many
horses so he's the handsome young man
who became you know like a rock star he
became famous at the Olympics
apparently he's also a great Horseman or
great at riding horses and he's done
this and we have his we have his
lectures we have his speech recorded by
Thucydides he openly admits he did this
both to propel and the greatness of
Athens as a kind of propaganda for
Athens in the middle of the war and also
to propel himself he says openly yes he
wants to be a military leader and a
political leader in the democracy he's
putting so forth now at what point do we
stop dismissing evidence
of what the teaching of Socrates was so
we have these huge incredibly boring
books from Plato we said oh no no no no
that's just evidence of the philosophy
of Plato not the philosophy of Socrates
really so so why doesn't Aristotle say
that when he criticizes Plato Aristotle
is basically one generation later
Aristotle knew Plato that Aristotle
didn't really know Socrates there's a
passage of time ago there is a younger
half generation removed whatever we
don't so we got really nasty really
tough criticism of Plato from from
Aristotle he really scorns Plato's
intellectual legacy and I think rightly
so
I think he's basically correct and what
he what he says he's gonna split up
mm-hmm he doesn't say well you know the
problem with Plato is that he totally
misrepresented Socrates no wouldn't that
be tempting wouldn't that be important
him to say and all conversely I would
not imagine that Plato is very
accurately and very slavish Lee
continuing the philosophy of Socrates I
do think Plato as philosophers know
right but in this broad thematic sense
that Socrates was someone who wasn't
just interested in lecturing on the
nature of virtue and justice but that he
was really interested in talking about
philosophers meaning people who had been
trained by him taking over leadership of
government and he was interested in
Plato doing it he was interested in elke
VI he's doing he was interested in his
own pupils playing a more direct civic
role in Athens just ask why not I mean
this is not an enormous democracy like
the United States of America where you'd
say well come on you have a few pupils
at your university in Virginia why do
you think you are going to get elected
to the Senate no in fact I think there
are professors of political science in
Virginia who are training their students
to be elected to the Senate but this is
a town this is not even a city by modern
standards they don't have millions of
twins of people you run a school it's a
school for philosophy it's a school for
politics to some extent to someone you
want a school in this town you're
teaching these virtues you're teaching
what it is to be a man you're teaching
what is to be a leader and you want your
pupils to
be elected someone's going to be elected
in Athens and it's in the middle of this
terrible war where if the wrong people
are leaders if Cleon becomes a leader it
has consequences if one leader or
another comes to prominence it has real
consequences for us all and again he's
not a Buddhist monk he's not a peacenik
he's not anti-war he's not about
withdrawing from public life there's no
reason to doubt that in broad
brushstrokes no I don't think I don't
think Socrates shared plato's fantasies
about a specific utopia but in
broad-brush jokes that Socrates wanted
his students to play the kind of
aggressive political role that Plato
played that a generation later
Aristotle played and that alka be a
tease played and so I'll keep you a
tease here's his star pupil rise in top
now after Socrates is dead and during
the trial of Socrates
oh no no no everyone has to say oh well
you know um
you know I'll keep yachties he was
really he was really doing his own thing
he wasn't um he wasn't falling
philosophy I'm sorry
really really and Plato too huh gee it's
see it seems like nobody represents the
the continuation of the philosophy have
started again Xenophon oh no no Xenophon
he's just completely making up his own
philosophy and he's just using the name
sorry really so all of his pupils just
decided to radically depart from his
Lawson we can't we can't by the
comparative study of his pupils you know
pick out a really strong continuum of at
least ematic and political interests
that show a very clear direction that's
that's what I think and I think I'll
keep you at ease and thinking exactly
the shame of alka Betty's in the shock
is the algae be at ease was Socrates a
star pupil they slept in the same tent
during the war they went up and observed
the troops he trained Alka be at ease to
be a warrior to be a military leader to
be a political leader they walked in we
know this is when al-kuwaiti's was too
young to be to be a general and a leader
they they went and visited the
battlefields of all this recorded and
there are um there were actually
disputes about whether or not Socrates
was in love with
I'll give you a tease because this is
Athens and everyone everyone wants to
make up homosexual romances about every
historical figure
you're mean about this this period a lot
of things about Socrates his story
seemed that it seemed indicate that he
was on the heterosexual side of the
equation but regardless what does
al-kabir DS do he transforms his social
status by participating in the Olympic
Games and the by the way these were
incredibly politically tense Olympic
Angels a unique Olympic Games it's it's
a weird historical parallel to the
period when the Soviet Union the United
States we're both trying to exclude each
other from the Olympic Games the Spartan
side and the Athenian side and different
proxies they were trying to exclude each
other there is this question of who
would be allowed to participate and who
would be allowed to participate in
sports who bless it was this intensely
political example of the Olympic Games
in the midst of this huge war that time
was like a world war for them the known
world was at war and they were trying to
get together and put aside their
differences having Olympic Games at home
we're not gonna let you participate in
this ceremony at this temple so he
catapults himself to being a major
military leader it's sometimes
translated that he's a general sometimes
they he's an admiral because this war
involves a lot of boats at the head of a
navy of over 100 galleys at the most
crucial part of the war but I just
mentioned very briefly the rumors about
his impiety about him him following
these newfangled
philosophical ideas and not adhering to
the gods of his ancestors they follow
after him you can read the rest of the
story if you want to I'm not gonna get
into details he is ultimately dragged
down and his public reputation is
destroyed because of his connection I
would say to the philosophy of Socrates
to the philosophy of the man who was
ridiculed ridiculed in a comedy for
saying that lightning is not created by
Zeus it's created by the clouds and the
clouds are not controlled by a God in
the sense of Zeus they aren't gods
themselves that they follow the
principles of nature the principles of
physics they would use the word physics
vortex chaos is that our
and we have this philosophy continuing
through his students some of the
students were more interested in one
part the legacy someone another so as I
say my conclusion for this video when I
look back at my own life Here I am at 40
years old and I am still astonished
still to this day I'm astonished at the
extent to which simply the philosophy of
Socrates for better and for worse I'm by
no means I am NOT an uncritical fan of
Socrates is not well understood
Socrates wears a robe he is not
therefore an exponent of peace or an
exponent of Buddhism or any kind of you
know philosophy like Buddhism it's not
about celibacy it's not about
non-violence it's not about withdrawing
from public and political discourse and
the fact that he wears a robe and comes
from Athens we've taken him as a symbol
of democracy people say that about Plato
also and if I were teaching a university
course on Plato verson I'd have to say
to people for first thing look guys
Plato was the world's worst enemy of
democracy
he's not just a critic he Plato is a key
democracy and you know it's it's a real
question to what extent was Socrates not
just a critic of democracy but even
anti-democracy did Socrates believe like
Plato or did he come to believe with the
passage of time that the rule of the
majority was less important than the
rule of the why is the rule of the
competent the rule of philosophers or
the rule of at least educated people
just as in our own time you know you
need a driver's license to drive a car
but you don't need a you don't need a
voting license to vote you don't need an
education and politics all of these guys
lived through the tragedy of watching
illiterate stupid ignorant people be led
by their passions and make terrible
decisions terrible decisions in both
peace and war that bankrupted the
country led to enormous
numbers of deaths led to people being
enslaved led to the empire expanding and
expanding too much and then collapsing
these guys lives live then it led to
also the collapse of democracy and
democracy being replaced now oligarchy
and above all else that same impetuous
stupid element of democracy as they saw
it have ins led to the trial and
execution of Socrates himself it led to
the bizarre trial and condemnation of
alka be at ease his star pupil who was
rising up quickly to be a great leader
of men and and they tried him in his
absence they tried him in of sting he
was not in court to plead his own sight
they waited from the leave town and then
had this trial accusing him of of
impiety they lived through all of this
and were left with an intellectual
legacy where we mostly know when
understand Athens through its harshest
critics but we can understand Athens the
advantages and virtues of its democracy
precisely because we know it through its
critics not through people who are just
praising it and I'm amazed that a 2019
it seems to me that people are still
reluctant to accept and learn about
Socrates through his critics even though
it's called comedy I really think if you
take a detached look at the clouds by
Aristophanes this this critique this
vilification of Socrates you're gonna
get a much much more honest insight into
both why Socrates became famous and why
he became hated and on the contrary if
you read whether from Plato or from
zeniff on the apology for Socrates the
explanation from afterwards you have to
read these things as being 180 degrees
opposite of the truth in some cases
every mention of alka be at ease oh no
no no all of Socrates is students were
very humble and never tried to take over
the government and you know Alka be at
ease you know he
one bad egg and you know I tried to give
him a good education but he just didn't
fall you know this is in the contact you
know the context is in the context of a
guy being executed for being heretic you
know for daring to question you know I
made an earlier video that was titled
you know Socrates must die ohai Socrates
why Socrates must die
Socrates remains a profoundly
instructive example of both what was
right and what was wrong with Athenian
society it's I think it's a
fundamentally wonderful thing for a
society to turn to its own population
and say you yes you are capable of a
higher level of responsibility don't
just be responsible for your own
household for your own amusement for
your own self-indulgence you know I want
you to be responsible for the greater
good of this city as a whole
or this the societies all that's a
wonderful thing and you see all of
Athenian society was infused with his
tremendous dynamism just because
ordinary people took on the type of
responsibility and planning and thinking
and debate that in a monarchy in the
Dark Ages in Europe only a tiny number
of people surrounding the King engaged
in a tiny number of aristocrats in the
immediate company of the King would
engage in that kind of thinking
education debate what-have-you so
there's this amazing wonderful
intellectual dynamism and depth that the
whole society takes on thanks to this
democracy but Socrates and the history
of the Peloponnesian War shows us also
the tremendous danger of placing that
responsibility in the hands of people
who do not have the education who do not
have the intellectual capacity to handle
that responsibility and that is
ultimately what killed Socrates himself
and what ruined Athens in their long
long war against Sparta